Title: Brain tumor - children

A brain tumor is a group (mass) of abnormal cells that start in the brain. This article focuses on primary brain tumors in children.

Subtopic: Causes
The cause of primary brain tumors is unknown. Primary brain tumors may be:Not cancerous (benign)Invasive (spread to nearby areas)Cancerous (malignant)Brain tumors are classified based on:The exact site of the tumorThe type of tissue involvedWhether it is cancerousBrain tumors can directly destroy brain cells. They can also indirectly damage cells by pushing on other parts of the brain. This leads to swelling and increased pressure within the skull.Tumors may occur at any age. Many tumors are more common at a certain age. Most brain tumors are rare in the first year of life.COMMON TUMOR TYPESAstrocytomas are usually noncancerous, slow-growing cysts. They most commonly develop in children ages 5 - 8.Brainstem gliomas occur almost only in children. The average age at which they develop is about 6 years old. The tumor may grow very large before causing symptoms.Ependymomas are located in tiny passageways (ventricles) in the brain. These tumors can block the flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).Medulloblastomas are the most common type of childhood brain cancer. They occur more often in boys than girls, usually around age 5. Most medulloblastomas occur before age 10.

Subtopic: Symptoms
Symptoms may be subtle and only gradually become worse. Or they may occur very quickly.Headaches are probably the most common symptom. Patterns that may occur with brain tumors include:Headaches that get worse when waking up in the morning, and then go away within a few hoursHeadaches that get worse with coughing or exercise, or with a change in body positionHeadaches that occur while sleeping and with at least one other symptom (such as vomiting or confusion) Patients with brain tumors may have a seizure. This may be the first symptom or sign.Sometimes the only symptoms of brain tumors are mental changes, which may include:Changes in personality and behaviorImpaired concentrationIncreased sleepMemory lossProblems with reasoning Other possible symptoms are:Gradual loss of movement or feeling in an arm or legHearing loss, with or without dizzinessSpeech difficultyUnexpected vision problem (especially if it occurs with a headache), including vision loss (usually of peripheral vision) in one or both eyes, or double visionUnsteadiness and problems with balanceWeakness or numbness 

Subtopic: Exams and Tests
The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Infants may have the following physical signs:Bulging fontanellesEnlarged eyesNo red reflex in the eyePositive Babinski reflexSeparated sutures The following tests may be used to detect a brain tumor and identify its location:CT-guided biopsy (may confirm the exact type of tumor)CT scan of the headEEGExamination of the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF)MRI of the head 

Subtopic: Treatment
Early treatment often improves the chance of a good outcome. Treatment depends on the size and type of tumor and the child's general health.The following are treatments for specific types of tumors:Astrocytoma -- Surgery to remove the tumor is the main treatment.Brainstem gliomas -- Surgery is usually not possible because of the tumor's location in the brain. Radiation and chemotherapy are used to shrink the tumor and prolong life.Ependymomas -- Treatment may include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.Medulloblastomas -- Surgery alone does not cure this type of tumor. Chemotherapy and radiation are often used in combination with surgery.The goals of treatment may be to cure the tumor, relieve symptoms, and improve brain function or the child's comfort.Surgery is needed for most primary brain tumors. Some tumors may be completely removed. Those that are deep inside the brain or that enter brain tissue may be debulked instead of entirely removed. Debulking is a procedure to reduce the tumor's size without completely removing it.In cases where the tumor cannot be removed, surgery may help reduce pressure and relieve symptoms.Radiation therapy and chemotherapy may be used for certain tumors.Other medicines used to treat primary brain tumors in children include:Corticosteroids such as dexamethasone to reduce brain swellingDiuretics such as urea or mannitol to reduce brain swelling and pressureAnticonvulsants such as phenytoin or levetiracetam to reduce or prevent seizuresPain medicines Comfort measures, safety measures, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and other such steps may be required to improve quality of life. Counseling, support groups, and similar measures can help the family cope.

Subtopic: Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a cancer support group. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you and your family not feel alone.

Subtopic: Outlook (Prognosis)
How well the child does depends on many things, including the exact type of tumor. In general, about 3 of 4 children survive at least 5 years after being diagnosed.Long-term brain and nervous system problems may result from the tumor itself or from treatment. Children may have problems with attention, concentration, or memory. They may also have problems processing information, planning, insight, or initiative or desire to do things. Other common problems are not being able to stay organized and on-task. Children younger than age 7, especially younger than age 3, appear to be at greatest risk of these complications. Parents need to make sure that children receive support services at home and at school.

Subtopic: Possible Complications
Brain herniation (often fatal)Loss of ability to interact or functionPermanent, worsening, severe brain and nervous system (neurological) problemsSide effects related to chemotherapy and radiationTumor returns (relapse)

Subtopic: When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call a health care provider if a child develops headaches that do not go away or other symptoms of a brain tumor.Go to the emergency room if a child has a seizure that is unusual or suddenly develops stupor (reduced alertness), vision changes, or speech changes.

Subtopic: Alternative Names
Glioblastoma multiforme - children; Ependymoma - children; Glioma - children; Astrocytoma - children; Medulloblastoma - children; Neuroglioma - children; Oligodendroglioma - children; Meningioma - children; Cancer - brain tumor (children)