Title: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia is cancer of a type of white blood cells called lymphocytes.See also:Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)Leukemia

Subtopic: Causes
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) causes a slow increase in white blood cells called B lymphocytes, or B cells. Cancer cells spread through the blood and bone marrow, and can also affect the lymph nodes or other organs such as the liver and spleen. CLL eventually causes the bone marrow to fail.IThe cause of CLL is unknown. There is no link to radiation, cancer-causing chemicals, or viruses.This cancer mostly affects adults, around age 70. It is rarely seen under age 40. The disease is more common in Jewish people of Russian or East European descent.

Subtopic: Symptoms
Symptoms usually develop slowly over time. Many cases of CLL are detected by blood tests done in people for other reasons or who do not have any symptoms.Symptoms that can occur include:Abnormal bruising (occurs late in the disease)Enlarged lymph nodes, liver, or spleenExcessive sweating, night sweatsFatigueFeverInfections that keep coming back (recur)Loss of appetite or becoming full too quickly (early satiety)Unintentional weight loss

Subtopic: Exams and Tests
Patients with CLL usually have a higher-than-normal white blood cell count.Tests to diagnose and assess CLL include:Complete blood count (CBC) with white blood cell differentialBone marrow biopsyCT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvisImmunoglobulin testingFlow cytometry test of the white blood cellsIf your doctor discovers you have CLL, tests will be done to see how much the cancer has spread. This is called staging.There are two systems used to stage CLL:The Rai system uses numbers 0 to IV to group CLL into low-, intermediate-, and high-risk categories. Generally, the higher the stage number, the more advanced the cancer.The Binet system uses letters A-C to stage CLL according to how many lymph node groups are involved and whether you have a drop in the number of red blood cells or platelets.Some newer tests look at the chromosomes inside the cancer cells. The results can help your doctor better determine your treatment.

Subtopic: Treatment
If you have early stage CLL, your doctor will closely monitor you. Usually, no medicines or other treatment is given for early-stage CLL, unless you have: A high-risk type of CLLInfections that keep coming backLeukemia that is rapidly getting worseLow blood and platelet countsFatigue, loss of appetite, weight loss, or night sweatsPainful swollen lymph nodesChemotherapy medicines are used to treat CLL. Common ones include:Fludarabine, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), and rituximab (Rituxan) used alone or together.Alemtuzumab (Campath) for patients with CLL that did not get better with fludarabine.Bendamustine for patients with CLL that has come back after initial treatment.Rarely, radiation may be used for painfully enlarged lymph nodes. Blood transfusions or platelet transfusions may be required if blood counts are low.Bone marrow or stem cell transplantation may be used in younger patients with advanced or high-risk CLL. A transplant is the only therapy that offers a potential cure for CLL.

Subtopic: Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a patient does depends on the stage of the cancer. About half of patients diagnosed in the early stages of the disease live more than 12 years.

Subtopic: Possible Complications
Autoimmune hemolytic anemiaBleeding from low platelet countHypogammaglobulinemia, a condition in which you have lower levels of antibodies, which increases your risk of infection Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)Infections that keep coming back (recur)Overwhelming fatigueOther cancers, including a much more aggressive lymphoma (Richter’s transformation)Side effects of chemotherapy

Subtopic: When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call health care provider if you develop enlarged lymph nodes or unexplained fatigue, bruising, excessive sweating, or weight loss.

Subtopic: Alternative Names
CLL; Leukemia - chronic lymphocytic (CLL)