Title: Eye burning - itching and discharge

Eye burning with discharge is burning, itching, or drainage from the eye of any substance other than tears.

Subtopic: Considerations
Sometimes burning and itching eyes are due to environmental pollutants. If secondhand cigarette smoke is annoying, say so. If an industrial plant in the area is polluting, contact the EPA for solutions.

Subtopic: Causes
Allergies, including seasonal allergies or hay feverBacterial infectionsChemical irritants (such as chlorine in a swimming pool or makeup)Conjunctivitis or pink eyeDry eyesIrritants in the air (cigarette smoke or smog)

Subtopic: Home Care
Apply cool compresses to soothe itching.If the eyelids have crusts, gently soften them with warm compresses. Gently washing the eyelids with baby shampoo on a cotton applicator can help remove crusts.Artificial tears used 4 - 6 times a day can also relieve symptoms. Avoid other types of eye drops because they will can make symptoms worse.Itching and burning due to allergy or chemicals can be very uncomfortable. Try to determine the cause of the allergy, such as a pet, seasonal pollen, or irritating cosmetics.Refrigerated artificial tears can be very soothing. Antihistamine drops, available from your health care provider, can be helpful.Pink eye or viral conjunctivitis causes a red or bloodshot eye and excessive tearing. If you suspect pink eye, remember to wash your hands often, and avoid touching the unaffected eye. The infection will run its course in about 10 days.Bacterial conjunctivitis is not common, but if you have eye discharge that is white, yellow, or greenish, contact your health care provider.

Subtopic: When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if:The discharge is thick, greenish, or resembles pusYou have excessive eye pain or sensitivity to lightYour vision is decreased

Subtopic: What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your health care provider will get a medical history and will perform a physical examination.Medical history questions may include:What does the eye drainage look like? 

Is it thick?Is it yellow?Does it look like pus?Is it green?Is it bloody?Is it clear?Other questions 

What other symptoms do you have?Do you have decreased vision?Do you have eye pain?Do you have light sensitivity (photophobia)?The physical examination may include a check of your:EyelidsEye motionReaction of your pupils to lightVisionTreatment:Your health care provider may prescribe antihistamines in the form of eye drops or ointments. Bacterial conjunctivitis will be treated with antibiotic eye drops. Cortisone-like eye ointments are usually avoided, because they can cause long-term problems.After seeing your health care provider:If your symptoms do not improve or they worsen in 1 - 2 weeks, contact your health care professional. You might need additional treatments.

Subtopic: Alternative Names
Itching - burning eyes; Burning eyes