Title: Ovarian cancer

Ovarian cancer is cancer that starts in the ovaries. The ovaries are the female reproductive organs that produce eggs.

Subtopic: Causes
Ovarian cancer is the fifth most common cancer among women. It causes more deaths than any other type of female reproductive cancer.The cause is unknown.Risk of developing ovarian cancer may be due to: The fewer children a woman has and the later in life she gives birth, the higher her risk of ovarian cancer. Certain gene problems (defects in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes) are responsible for a small number of ovarian cancer cases. Women who have had breast cancer or have a family history of breast or ovarian cancer have an increased risk of ovarian cancer.Women who take estrogen replacement only (not with progesterone) for 5 years or more may have a high risk of ovarian cancer. Birth control pills, however, decrease the risk of ovarian cancer.Fertility drugs probably do not increase the risk of ovarian cancer.Older women are at highest risk of developing ovarian cancer. Most deaths from ovarian cancer occur in women age 55 and older.

Subtopic: Symptoms
Ovarian cancer symptoms are often vague. Women and their doctors often blame the symptoms on other, more common conditions. By the time the cancer is diagnosed, the tumor has often spread beyond the ovaries.See your doctor if you have the following symptoms on a daily basis for more than a few weeks:Bloating or swollen belly areaDifficulty eating or feeling full quicklyPelvic or lower abdominal pain; the area may feel "heavy" to you (pelvic heaviness) Other symptoms are also possiblewith ovarian cancer. But these symptoms are also common in women who do not have cancer:Abnormal menstrual cyclesDigestive symptoms: 
ConstipationIncreased gasIndigestionLack of appetiteNausea and vomiting Back pain for unknown reasons that worsens over timeVaginal bleeding that occurs between periodsWeight gain or loss Other symptoms that can occur with this disease:Excessive hair growth that is coarse and darkSudden urge to urinateNeeding to urinate more often than usual (increased urinary frequency or urgency ) 

Subtopic: Exams and Tests
A physical exam is often normal. With have advanced ovarian cancer, the doctor may find a swollen abdomen often due to collection (called ascites). A pelvic examination may reveal an ovarian or abdominal mass.A CA-125 blood test is not considered a good screening test for ovarian cancer. However, it may be done if a woman:Has symptoms of ovarian cancerHas already been diagnosed with ovarian cancer to determine how well treatment is working Other tests that may be done include:Complete blood count and blood chemistryPregnancy test (serum HCG)CT or MRI of the pelvis or abdomenUltrasound of the pelvis Surgery such as a pelvic laparoscopy or exploratory laparotomy is often done to find the cause of symptoms. A biopsy will be done to help make the diagnosis.No lab or imaging test has ever been shown to be able to screen for or diagnose ovarian cancer in its early stages.

Subtopic: Treatment
Surgery is used to treat all stages of ovarian cancer. For early stages surgery may be the only treatment. Surgery involves:Removal of the uterus (total hysterectomy)Removal of both ovaries and fallopian tubes (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy)Partial or complete removal of the omentum, the fatty layer that covers and pads organs in the abdomenExamination, biopsy, or removal of the lymph nodes and other tissues in the pelvis and abdomen Surgery done by a specialist in female organ cancers has been shown to result in a higher success rate.Chemotherapy is used after surgery to treat any cancer that remains. Chemotherapy can also be used if the cancer comes back. Chemotherapy is most often given into the veins. Sometimes it is given directly into the abdominal cavity (intraperitoneal).Radiation therapy is rarely used to treat ovarian cancer in the United States.After surgery and chemotherapy, patients should be followed up closely:A physical exam (including pelvic exam) every 2 - 4 months for the first 2 years. This is followed by every 6 months for 3 years, and then each year. A CA-125 blood test at each visit if the level started out high.The doctor may also order periodic computed tomography (CT) scans of your chest, abdomen, and pelvic area. 

Subtopic: Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a cancer support group. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.

Subtopic: Outlook (Prognosis)
Ovarian cancer is rarely diagnosed in its early stages. It is usually quite advanced by the time diagnosis is madeAbout 3 of 4 women with ovarian cancer survive 1 year after diagnosis.Nearly half of women live longer than 5 years after diagnosis.If diagnosis is made early in the disease and treatment is received before the cancer spreads outside the ovary, the 5-year survival rate is very high

Subtopic: Possible Complications
Spread of the cancer to other organsFluid in the abdomen (ascites)Blockage of the intestines 

Subtopic: When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you are a woman over 40 years old who has not recently had a pelvic exam. Routine pelvic exams are recommended for all women over 20 years old.Call for an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of ovarian cancer.

Subtopic: Prevention
There are no standard recommendations for screening for ovarian cancer. Pelvic ultrasound or blood tests, such as the CA-125 has not been found to be effective and is not recommended.BRCA gene testing may be done in women at high risk for ovarian cancer.Removing the ovaries and tubes in women who have a problem in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene may reduce the risk of developing ovarian cancer. But ovarian cancer may still develop in other areas of the pelvis.

Subtopic: Alternative Names
Cancer - ovaries