Title: Pelvic laparoscopy

Pelvic laparoscopy is surgery to examine pelvic organs using a viewing tool called a laparoscope. The surgery is also used to treat certain diseases of the pelvic organs. 

Subtopic: Description
While you are deep asleep and pain-free under general anesthesia, the doctor makes a half-inch surgical cut in the skin below the belly button. Carbon dioxide gas is pumped into the abdomen to help the doctor see the organs more easily.The laparoscope, an instrument that looks like a small telescope with a light and a video camera, is inserted so the doctor can view the area.Other instruments may be inserted through other small cuts in the lower abdomen. While watching a video monitor, the doctor is able to:Get tissue samples (biopsy)Look around and diagnose the cause of any symptomsRemove scar tissue or other abnormal tissue, such as from endometriosisRepair or remove part or all of the ovaries or tubesRepair or remove parts of the uterusDo other surgical procedures (such as appendectomy, removing lymph nodes)After the laparoscopy, the carbon dioxide gas is released, and the surgeon closes the cuts with stitches.The average time of surgery depends on the procedure performed.

Subtopic: Why the Procedure is Performed
Laparoscopy uses a smaller surgical cut than open surgery. This means you will likely have a shorter hospital stay and quicker recovery. There is less blood loss with laparoscopic surgery and less pain after surgery.Pelvic laparoscopy is used both for diagnosis and treatment. It may be recommended for:An abnormal pelvic mass or ovarian cyst found on pelvic ultrasoundCancer (ovarian, endometrial, or cervical) to see if it has spread or to remove nearby lymph nodes or tissue Chronic (long-term) pelvic pain, if no other cause has been foundEctopic (tubal) pregnancyEndometriosisDifficulty getting pregnant or having a baby (infertility)Sudden, severe pelvic pain A pelvic laparascopy may also be done to:Remove your uterus (hysterectomy)Remove uterine fibroids (myomectomy)"Tie" your tubes (tubal ligation/sterilization)

Subtopic: Risks
General anesthesia poses the risk of reactions to medications, including breathing problems. Risks for any pelvic surgery include:BleedingBlood clots in the leg or pelvic veins, which could travel to the lungs and, rarely, be fatalBreathing problemsDamage to nearby organs and tissuesHeart problemsInfection

Subtopic: Before the Procedure
Always tell your doctor or nurse:If you are or could be pregnantWhat drugs you are taking, even drugs, herbs, or supplements you bought without a prescriptionDuring the days before surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot.Ask your doctor or nurse which medicines you can still take on the day of your surgery.If you smoke, try to stop. Ask your doctor or nurse for help.Arrange for someone to drive you home after surgery.On the day of your surgery:You will usually be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before your surgery, or 8 hours before your surgery.Take the drugs your doctor or nurse told you to take with a small sip of water.Your doctor or nurse will tell you when to arrive at the hospital or clinic.

Subtopic: After the Procedure
You will spend some time in a recovery area as you wake up from the anesthesia.Often, you will be able to go home the same day as the procedure. Sometimes, you may need to stay overnight.

Subtopic: Outlook (Prognosis)
The gas pumped into the abdomen may cause abdominal discomfort for 1 - 2 days after the procedure. Some people feel neck and shoulder pain for several days after a laparoscopy as the carbon dioxide gas irritates the diaphragm, a pain which is felt in the shoulder. As the gas is absorbed this pain will go away. Lying down can help decrease the pain.Your doctor will give you a prescription for pain medicine or tell you what over-the-counter pain medicines you can take.You may resume your normal activities in fewer than 2 days. Depending on what procedure is done, you can usually begin sexual activities again as soon as the bleeding (if there is any) has stopped. Ask your doctor what is recommended for the procedure you are having. Do not lift anything over 10 pounds for 3 weeks after surgery to decrease your risk of getting a hernia in your incisions.Call your doctor if you have:Bleeding from the vaginaFever that doesn't go awayNausea and vomitingSevere abdominal pain

Subtopic: Alternative Names
Celioscopy; Band-aid surgery; Pelviscopy; Gynecologic laparoscopy; Exploratory laparoscopy - gynecologic