Title: Septal hematoma

A septal hematoma is a bruise or bleeding in the septum -- the part of the nose that separates the two nostrils.

Subtopic: Causes
A broken nose or any soft tissue injury to the area may cause a septal hematoma. This can occur more often in children because their septums are thicker and have a more flexible lining covering the area.An injury disrupts the blood vessels, allowing fluid and blood to collect under the lining.

Subtopic: Symptoms
Blockage in breathingNasal congestionPainful swelling of the nasal septum

Subtopic: Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will look into your nose to see if there is soft tissue swelling in the area separating the two sides of your nose. Gentle touching with an applicator or Q-tip will show that the area is soft and can be pressed down. The nasal septum is normally thin and rigid.

Subtopic: Treatment
Your health care provider will immediately drain the blood by making a small cut in the lining over the hematoma. Once the blood is removed, gauze or cotton is placed inside the nose.

Subtopic: Outlook (Prognosis)
If this injury is treated quickly, you should fully heal.

Subtopic: Possible Complications
If you have had the hematoma for a long time, it may become infected and will be painful. You may develop a septal abscess and fever.An untreated septal hematoma may lead to a hole in the area separating the two nostrils. This can cause nasal congestion. Or, the area may collapse, leading to a deformity called a saddle nose.

Subtopic: When to Contact a Medical Professional
Any nasal injury resulting in nasal congestion or pain may develop into a septal hematoma. You should call your health care provider, who may refer you to an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) specialist. Treatment by an ENT specialist can be done in an office setting.

Subtopic: Prevention
Although prevention of the injury may not be possible, early recognition and treatment will prevent complications and allow the septum to heal properly.