Title: Teething

Teething is the growth of teeth through the gums in the mouth of infants and young children.

Subtopic: Information
Teething usually begins when a baby is between 6 and 8 months old. All 20 baby teeth should be in place by the time a child is 30 months old. Some children do not show any teeth until much later than 8 months, but this is usually normal.The two bottom front teeth (lower incisors) usually come in first.Next to grow in are usually the two top front teeth (upper incisors).Then the other incisors, lower and upper molars, canines, and finally the upper and lower lateral molars come in.The signs of teething are:Acting cranky or irritableBiting or chewing on hard objectsDrooling, which may often begin before teething startsGum swelling and tendernessRefusing foodSleeping problemsTeething does NOT cause fever or diarrhea. If your child develops a fever or diarrhea and you are worried about it, talk to your health care provider.Tips to ease your child's teething discomfort:Wipe your baby's face with a cloth to remove the drool and prevent a rash.Give your infant a cool object to chew on, such as a firm rubber teething ring or a cold apple. Avoid liquid-filled teething rings, or any plastic objects that might break.Gently rub the gums with a cool, wet washcloth, or (until the teeth are right near the surface) a clean finger. You may place the wet washcloth in the freezer first, but wash it before using it again.Feed your child cool, soft foods such as applesauce or yogurt (if your baby is eating solids).Use a bottle, if it seems to help, but only fill it with water. Formula, milk, or juice can all cause tooth decay.You can buy the following medications and remedies at the drug store:Acetaminophen (Tylenol and others) or ibuprofen can help when your baby is very cranky or uncomfortable.Teething gels and preparations rubbed right on your baby's gums may help the pain for a short while. Be careful not to use too much.What not to do:DO NOT tie a teething ring or any other object around your child's neck.DO NOT place anything frozen against your child's gums.NEVER cut the gums to help a tooth grow in, because this can lead to infection.Avoid teething powders.NEVER give your child aspirin or place it against the gums or teeth.DO NOT rub alcohol on your baby's gums.

Subtopic: Update Date: 11/12/2012
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine. Also reviewed by A.D.A.M. Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc., Editorial Team: David Zieve, MD, MHA, David R. Eltz, Stephanie Slon, and Nissi Wang.  Browse the Encyclopedia