Title: Transient ischemic attack

A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is when blood flow to a part of the brain stops for a brief period of time. A person will have stroke-like symptoms for up to 24 hours, but in most cases for 1 - 2 hours.A TIA is felt to be a warning sign that a true stroke may happen in the future if something is not done to prevent it.

Subtopic: Causes
A TIA is different than a stroke. After a TIA, the blockage breaks up quickly and dissolves. Unlike a stroke, a TIA does not cause brain tissue to die.The loss of blood flow to an area of the brain can be caused by:A blood clot in an artery of the brainA blood clot that travels to the brain from somewhere else in the body (for example, from the heart)An injury to blood vesselsNarrowing of a blood vessel in the brain or leading to the brainHigh blood pressure is the number one risk for TIAs and stroke. The other major risk factors are:Atrial fibrillationDiabetesFamily history of strokeHigh cholesterolIncreasing age, especially after age 55Race (African Americans are more likely to die from stroke)People who have heart disease or poor blood flow in their legs caused by narrowed arteries are also more likely to have a TIA or stroke.See also: Stroke risk factors

Subtopic: Symptoms
Symptoms begin suddenly, last only a short time (from a few minutes to 1 - 2 hours), and go away completely. They may occur again at a later time.The symptoms of TIA are the same as the symptoms of a stroke, and include sudden:Abnormal feeling of movement (vertigo) or dizzinessChange in alertness (sleepiness, less responsive, unconscious, or in a coma)Changes in feeling, including touch, pain, temperature, pressure, hearing, and tasteConfusion or loss of memoryDifficulty swallowingDifficulty writing or readingDrooping of the faceInability to recognize objects or peopleLack of control over the bladder or bowelsLack of coordination and balance, clumsiness, or trouble walkingLoss of vision in one or both eyesNumbness or tingling on one side of the bodyPersonality, mood, or emotional changesTrouble saying or understanding wordsWeakness on one side of the body

Subtopic: Exams and Tests
Almost always, the symptoms and signs of a TIA will have gone away by the time you get to the hospital. A TIA diagnosis may be made based on your medical history alone.The health care provider will do a complete physical exam to check for heart and blood vessel problems, as well as for problems with nerves and muscles.Your blood pressure may be high. The doctor will use a stethoscope to listen to your heart and arteries. An abnormal sound called a bruit may be heard when listening to the carotid artery in the neck or other artery. A bruit is caused by irregular blood flow.Tests will be done to rule out a stroke or other disorders that may cause the symptoms.You will almost always have a head CT scan or brain MRI. A stroke will show changes on these tests, but TIAs will not.You will have an angiogram, CT angiogram, or MR angiogram to see which blood vessel is blocked or bleeding.You may have an echocardiogram if your doctor thinks you may have a blood clot from the heart.Carotid duplex (ultrasound) can show if the carotid arteries in your neck have narrowed.You may have an EKG and heart rhythm monitoring tests to check for an irregular heartbeat.Your doctor may do other tests to check high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes, high cholesterol, and other causes of, and risk factors for TIAs or stroke.

Subtopic: Treatment
The goal is to prevent a stroke.If you have had a TIA within the last 48 hours, you will likely be admitted to the hospital so that doctors can search for the cause and observe you.High blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes, and blood disorders should be treated as needed.You may receive blood thinners, such as aspirin, to reduce blood clotting. Other options include dipyridamole, clopidogrel, Aggrenox or heparin, Coumadin, or similar medicines. You may be treated for a long period of time.Some people who have clogged neck arteries may need surgery (carotid endarterectomy). If you have irregular heartbeats (atrial fibrillation), you will be treated to avoid future complications.

Subtopic: Outlook (Prognosis)
TIAs do not cause lasting damage to the brain.However, TIAs are a warning sign that you may have a true stroke in the coming days or months. More than 10% of people who have a TIA will have a stroke within 3 months. Half of these strokes happen during the 48 hours after a TIA. The stroke may occur that same day or at a later time. Some people have only a single episode, and some have more than one episode.You can reduce your chances of a future stroke by following-up with your health care provider to manage your risk factors.

Subtopic: When to Contact a Medical Professional
A TIA is a medical emergency. Call 911 or another local emergency number right away. Do not ignore symptoms just because they go away. They may be a warning of a future stroke.

Subtopic: Prevention
See also: Stroke risk factors and prevention

Subtopic: Alternative Names
Mini stroke; TIA; Little stroke